[Alerting][Docs] Support enablement documentation. (#101457)
elastic/kibana: docs/user/alerting/alerting-troubleshooting.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[[alerting-troubleshooting]]
== Troubleshooting
++++
<titleabbrev>Troubleshooting</titleabbrev>
++++

The Alerting framework provides many options for diagnosing problems with Rules and Connectors.

[float]
[[alerting-kibana-log]]
=== Check the {kib} log

Rules and connectors  log to the Kibana logger with tags of [alerting] and [actions], respectively.  Generally the messages are warnings and errors. In some cases, the error might be a false positive, for example, when a connector is deleted and a rule is running.

[source, txt]
--------------------------------------------------
server    log   [11:39:40.389] [error][alerting][alerting][plugins][plugins] Executing Alert "5b6237b0-c6f6-11eb-b0ff-a1a0cbcf29b6" has resulted in Error: Saved object [action/fdbc8610-c6f5-11eb-b0ff-a1a0cbcf29b6] not found
--------------------------------------------------

> Some of the resources, such as saved objects and API keys, may no longer be available or valid, yielding error messages about those missing resources. If {kib} logs is not clearly describing the problem, best to ask someone from the alerting team to determine whether errors/warnings are of which class.

Reviewer: Yes.  I don't think "ask someone from the alerting team" is appropriate :-)

> Some of the resources, such as saved objects and API keys, may no longer be available or valid, yielding error messages about those missing resources. If {kib} logs is not clearly describing the problem, best to ask someone from the alerting team to determine whether errors/warnings are of which class.

Author: Removed "ask someone from the alerting team"

[float]
[[alerting-kibana-version]]
=== Use the debugging tools
The following debugging tools are available:

* {kib} versions 7.10 and above
have a <<testing-connectors,Test connector>> UI.

* {kib} versions 7.11 and above
include improved Webhook error messages,
better overall debug logging for actions and connectors,

> and Task Manager <<task-manager-diagnosing-root-cause,diagnostics endpoints>>.

Reviewer: It actually is kind of useful.  For folks on older versions of Kibana, there were cases where we didn't log much information; webhook as an example.  So we've actually mentioned this in support cases - that upgrading will yield better diagnostics.

> and Task Manager <<task-manager-diagnosing-root-cause,diagnostics endpoints>>.

Author: I think it's good to have, current text doesn't seem to me very Dev specific.

Diagnosing these may be difficult - but there may be log messages for error conditions. 

[float]
[[alerting-rest-api]]
=== Use the REST APIs

There is a rich set of HTTP endpoints to introspect and manage rules and connectors.
One of the http endpoints available for actions is the POST _execute API (reference).  You can use this to “test” an action.  For instance, if you have a server log action created, you can execute it via curling the endpoint:
[source, txt]
--------------------------------------------------
curl -X POST -k \
 -H 'kbn-xsrf: foo' \
 -H 'content-type: application/json' \
 https://elastic:changeme@localhost:5601/api/actions/connector/a692dc89-15b9-4a3c-9e47-9fb6872e49ce/_execute \
 -d '{"params":{"subject":"hallo","message":"hallo!","to":["me@example.com"]}}'
--------------------------------------------------

In addition, there is a command-line client that uses legacy Rules and Connectors APIs, which can be easier to use, but must be updated for the new APIs.

> CLI tools to list create, edit, and delete alerts and actions are available in https://github.com/pmuellr/kbn-action[kbn-action], which you can install as follows:

Reviewer: I don't think we should link to `kbn-action` in our docs; especially since the cross-version support is kinda iffy - you can use some older versions of the tool with some older versions of Kibana, but mostly, older versions of Kibana will not work with newer versions of the tool, and vice versa.

`status`:: This is the current status of the task.  Is Task Manager is currently running? Is Task Manager idle,  and you’re waiting for it to run?  Or has Task Manager has tried to run it and failed?
`runAt`:: This is when the task is scheduled to run next. If this is in the past and the status is idle, Task Manager has fallen behind or isn’t running. If it’s in the past, but the status is running, then Task Manager has picked it up and is working on it, which is considered healthy.
`retryAt`:: Another time field, like runAt. If this field is populated, then Task Manager is currently running the task. If the task doesn’t complete (and isn't marked as failed), then Task Manager will give it another attempt at the time specified under retryAt.

Investigating the underlying task can help you gauge whether the problem you’re seeing is rooted in the alert not running at all, whether it’s running and failing, or whether it is running, but exhibiting behavior that is different than what was expected (at which point you should focus on the rule itself, rather than the task).

In addition to the above methods, broadly used the next approaches and common issues:

> * <<alerting-common-issues, Alerting common issues>>

Reviewer 2: These are not listed in the same order as they show up in the table of contents. Can we have them in the same order?

> * <<event-log-index, Quering Event log index>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* <<event-log-index, Querying Event log index>>
```

--------------------------------------------------
Some of the resources, such as saved objects and API keys, may no longer be available or valid, yielding error messages about those missing resources.

[float]
[[alerting-kibana-version]]
=== Use the debugging tools
The following debugging tools are available:

* {kib} versions 7.10 and above
have a <<testing-connectors,Test connector>> UI.

* {kib} versions 7.11 and above
include improved Webhook error messages,
better overall debug logging for actions and connectors,
and Task Manager <<task-manager-diagnosing-root-cause,diagnostics endpoints>>.

[float]
[[alerting-managment-detail]]
=== Using rules and connectors list for the current state and finding issues
*Rules and Connectors* in *Stack Management* lists the rules and connectors available in the space you’re currently in. When you click a rule name, you are navigated to the <<rule-details,details page>> for the rule, where you can see currently active alerts. 
The start date on this page indicates when a rule is triggered, and for what alerts. In addition, the duration of the condition indicates how long the instance is active.

[float]
[[alerting-index-threshold-chart]]

> === Preview the index threshold rule chart

Reviewer 2: This section talks about the index threshold preview chart but the screenshot is of the rule details page. There is no end date in the rule details page.

When creating or editing an index threshold rule, you see a graph of the data the rule will operate against, from some date in the past until now, updated every 5 seconds.  
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/rule-details-alerts-inactive.png[Index Threshold chart]

The end date is related to the rule interval (IIRC, 30 “intervals” worth of time). You can use this view to see if the rule is getting the data you expect, and visually compare to the threshold value (a horizontal line in the graph). If the graph does not contain any lines except for the threshold line, then the rule has an issue, for example, no data is available given the specified index and fields or there is a permission error.
Diagnosing these may be difficult - but there may be log messages for error conditions. 

[float]
[[alerting-rest-api]]
=== Use the REST APIs

There is a rich set of HTTP endpoints to introspect and manage rules and connectors.

> One of the http endpoints available for actions is the POST _execute API (reference).  You can use this to “test” an action.  For instance, if you have a server log action created, you can execute it via curling the endpoint:

Reviewer 2: Is `(reference)` supposed to link to something?

[source, txt]
--------------------------------------------------
curl -X POST -k \
 -H 'kbn-xsrf: foo' \
 -H 'content-type: application/json' \
 api/actions/connector/a692dc89-15b9-4a3c-9e47-9fb6872e49ce/_execute \
 -d '{"params":{"subject":"hallo","message":"hallo!","to":["me@example.com"]}}'
--------------------------------------------------

> Experimental[] In addition, there is a command-line client that uses legacy Rules and Connectors APIs, which can be easier to use, but must be updated for the new APIs.

Reviewer 2: This isn't showing up with the right formatting

> CLI tools to list create, edit, and delete alerts (rules) and actions (connectors) are available in https://github.com/pmuellr/kbn-action[kbn-action], which you can install as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CLI tools to list, create, edit, and delete alerts (rules) and actions (connectors) are available in https://github.com/pmuellr/kbn-action[kbn-action], which you can install as follows:
```

[float]
[[alerting-index-threshold-chart]]
=== Preview Index Threshold Rule Chart

When creating or editing an Index threshold rule, you will see a graph of the data the rule will be operating against, from some date in the past, to now, updated every 5 seconds.  
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/rule-details-alerts-inactive.png[Index Threshold chart]

The end date is related to the alert interval (IIRC, 30 “intervals” worth of time). You can use this view to see if the rule is getting the data you expect, and visually compare to the threshold value (a horizontal line in the graph). If the graph does not contain any lines at all except for the threshold line, then the rule is having an issue of some kind. Either there is no data available given the index and fields specified, a permission error, etc.
Diagnosing these may be difficult - but there may be log messages for error conditions. 

[float]
[[alerting-rest-api]]
=== Using REST APIs

There is a fairly rich set of HTTP endpoints to introspect and manage rules and connectors.  

> In addition, there is a command-line client that uses legacy Rules and Connectors APIs, which be easier to to use, but it needs to be updated for the new APIs:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition, there is a command-line client that uses legacy Rules and Connectors APIs, which can be easier to use, but must be updated for the new APIs.
```

> https://github.com/pmuellr/kbn-action

Reviewer 3: Something is wrong with this sentence.

Author: Yeah, I will change it

executing an action ad-hoc
One of the http endpoints available for actions is the POST _execute API (reference).  You can use this to “test” an action.  For instance, if you have a server log action created, you can execute it via curling the endpoint:
[source, txt]
--------------------------------------------------
curl -X POST -k \
 -H 'kbn-xsrf: foo' \
 -H 'content-type: application/json' \
 https://elastic:changeme@localhost:5601/api/actions/connector/a692dc89-15b9-4a3c-9e47-9fb6872e49ce/_execute \
 -d '{"params":{"subject":"hallo","message":"hallo!","to":["me@example.com"]}}'
--------------------------------------------------

> Another option is CLI tools to list / create / edit / delete alerts and actions are available in https://github.com/pmuellr/kbn-action[kbn-action]. Install via command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CLI tools to list create, edit, and delete alerts and actions are available in https://github.com/pmuellr/kbn-action[kbn-action], which you can install as follows:
```

[source, txt]
--------------------------------------------------

>     npm install -g pmuellr/kbn-action  

Reviewer 3: I don't think pmuellr is right here.

Author: This repository will be moved from the pmuellr own repository to Kibana - open [issue](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/101503)

--------------------------------------------------

> and the same REST execute command will be:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The same REST execute command will be:
```

[source, txt]
--------------------------------------------------
kbn-action execute a692dc89-15b9-4a3c-9e47-9fb6872e49ce ‘{"params":{"subject":"hallo","message":"hallo!","to":["me@example.com"]}}’
--------------------------------------------------

The result of this http request (and printed to stdout by https://github.com/pmuellr/kbn-action[kbn-action]) will be data returned by the action execution, along with error messages if errors were encountered.

[float]
[[alerting-framework-health-ui]]

> === Alerting Framework Health

Reviewer 3: The heading doesn't match what's in this section.  Can it be "Look for error banners"

> Rule Management and Rule Details pages contains an error banner, which helps to identify the errors for the rules:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Rule Management and Rule Details pages contain an error banner, which helps to identify the errors for the rules:
```

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/rules-management-health.png[Rule management page with the errors banner]

[role="screenshot"]

> image::images/rules-details-health.png[Rule details page with the errors banner]

Reviewer 3: The error message is this image is not very good.

[float]
[[task-manager-diagnostics]]
=== Task Manager diagnostics

> Under the hood, Rules and Connectors use another plugin called Task Manager, which handles the scheduling, execution and error handling of the tasks that drive the Rules and Connectors features.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Under the hood, Rules and Connectors uses a plugin called Task Manager, which handles the scheduling, execution, and error handling of the tasks.
```

This means that failure cases in Rules or Connectors will, at times, be revealed by the Task Manager mechanism, rather than the Rules mechanism.

> Task Manager provides a visible status which can be used to diagnose issues and is very well documented health monitoring and troubleshooting. 

Reviewer 3: Should there be a link to the documentation here?

> Task Manager uses the `.kibana_task_manager index`, which is an internal index we use to contain all the saved objects that represent the tasks in the system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Task Manager uses the `.kibana_task_manager index`, an internal index that contains all the saved objects that represent the tasks in the system.
```

[float]
==== Getting from a Rule, to its Task

> When a Rule is created a Task is created which is scheduled to run at the interval specified. This means that if, for example, when a rule is created its configured to check every 5 minutes, then the underlying will be expected to run every 5 minutes (in practice, after each time the alert is ran, we’ll schedule the task to run again in 5 minutes, rather than it being scheduled to run itself every 5 minutes indefinitely).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a rule is created, a task is created, scheduled to run at the interval specified. For example, when a rule is created and configured to check every 5 minutes, then the underlying task will be expected to run every 5 minutes. In practice, after each time the alert is run, the task is scheduled to run again in 5 minutes, rather than being scheduled to run every 5 minutes indefinitely.
```

If you use the <<alerting-apis,Alerting REST APIs>> to fetch the underlying rule, you’ll get an object like so:
[source, txt]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "id": "0a037d60-6b62-11eb-9e0d-85d233e3ee35",
  "notify_when": "onActionGroupChange",
  "params": {
    "aggType": "avg",
  },
  "consumer": "alerts",
  "rule_type_id": "test.rule.type",
  "schedule": {
    "interval": "1m"
  },
  "actions": [],
  "tags": [],
  "name": "test rule",
  "enabled": true,
  "throttle": null,
  "api_key_owner": "elastic",
  "created_by": "elastic",
  "updated_by": "elastic",
  "mute_all": false,
  "muted_alert_ids": [],
  "updated_at": "2021-02-10T05:37:19.086Z",
  "created_at": "2021-02-10T05:37:19.086Z",
  "scheduled_task_id": "31563950-b14b-11eb-9a7c-9df284da9f99",
  "execution_status": {
    "last_execution_date": "2021-02-10T17:55:14.262Z",
    "status": "ok"
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------

> The field we’re looking for is the one called scheduled_task_id which includes the _id of the Task Manager task, so if we then go to the Console and run the following query we’ll get the underlying task.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The field you’re looking for is the one called `scheduled_task_id` which includes the _id of the Task Manager task, so if you then go to the Console and run the following query, you’ll get the underlying task.
```

> GET .kibana_task_manager/_doc/task:31563950-b14b-11eb-9a7c-9df284da9f99

Reviewer 3: What is this sentence?

Author: I will change it to the curl query

[NOTE]
==============================================

> The task: in the ID of the doc. We have to add that to the UUID.

Reviewer 3: Not sure what this note means.

Author: removed

==============================================

[source, txt]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "_index" : ".kibana_task_manager_8.0.0_001",
  "_id" : "task:31563950-b14b-11eb-9a7c-9df284da9f99",
  "_version" : 838,
  "_seq_no" : 8791,
  "_primary_term" : 1,
  "found" : true,
  "_source" : {
    "migrationVersion" : {
      "task" : "7.6.0"
    },
    "task" : {
      "schedule" : {
        "interval" : "5s"
      },
      "taskType" : "alerting:.index-threshold",
      "retryAt" : null,
      "runAt" : "2021-05-10T05:18:02.704Z",
      "scope" : [
        "alerting"
      ],
      "startedAt" : null,
      "state" : """{"alertInstances":{},"previousStartedAt":"2021-05-10T05:17:45.671Z"}""",
      "params" : """{"alertId":"30d856c0-b14b-11eb-9a7c-9df284da9f99","spaceId":"default"}""",
      "ownerId" : null,
      "scheduledAt" : "2021-05-10T04:50:07.333Z",
      "attempts" : 0,
      "status" : "idle"
    },
    "references" : [ ],
    "updated_at" : "2021-05-10T05:17:58.000Z",
    "coreMigrationVersion" : "8.0.0",
    "type" : "task"
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------

> What you can see above is the Task that backs the rule, and for the rule to work, this task must be in a healthy state. This information is available via <<task-manager-api-health, health API>> or via verbose logs if debug logging is enabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
What you can see above is the task that backs the rule, and for the rule to work, this task must be in a healthy state. This information is available via <<task-manager-api-health, health API>> or via verbose logs if debug logging is enabled.
```

When diagnosing the health state of the task, you will most likely be interested in the following fields:

> `status`:: This is the tasks’s current status - is it running, meaning Task Manager is currently running it; or is it idle, meaning we’re waiting for Task Manager to run it at some point in the future; or is it failed, meaning Task Manager has tried to run it and failed?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`status`:: This is the current status of the task.  Is Task Manager is currently running? Is Task Manager idle,  and you’re waiting for it to run?  Or has Task Manager has tried to run it and failed?
```

> `runAt`:: This is when the task is scheduled to run next. If this is in the past and the status is idle, this means Task Manager has fallen behind or isn’t in fact running at all. If it’s in the past but the status is running, then that means Task Manager has picked it up and is working on it as we speak, which is fine and considered healthy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`runAt`:: This is when the task is scheduled to run next. If this is in the past and the status is idle, Task Manager has fallen behind or isn’t running. If it’s in the past, but the status is running, then Task Manager has picked it up and is working on it, which is considered healthy.
```

> `retryAt`:: Another time field, like runAt. If this field is populated, it means that Task Manager is currently running the task and if, for whether reason, the task doesn’t complete (and hasn’t been marked as failed) then Task Manager will give it another attempt at the time specified under retryAt.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`retryAt`:: Another time field, like runAt. If this field is populated, then Task Manager is currently running the task. If the task doesn’t complete (and isn't marked as failed), then Task Manager will give it another attempt at the time specified under retryAt.
```

> Investigating the underlying Task can help you gauge whether the problem you’re seeing is rooted in the Alert not running at all, whether it’s running and failing or whether it is running, but exhibiting behaviour that is different than what was expected (at which point you should focus on the Rule itself, rather than the Task).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Investigating the underlying task can help you gauge whether the problem you’re seeing is rooted in the alert not running at all, whether it’s running and failing, or whether it is running, but exhibiting behavior that is different than what was expected (at which point you should focus on the rule itself, rather than the task).
```

> In addition to the above methods, broadly used the next approaches and common issues:

Reviewer 3: Are the links to more topics needed here?

Reviewer 3: stopped here
